Welcome back!
Last time you saw the fork commands.
Now let's watch what they actually mean:
a live database app,
copied in seconds,
edited freely,
while the original never notices a thing.
Here's the setup:
a real PostgreSQL with a pgAdmin
interface on top,
live on the server.
A fork is an instant copy-on-write
twin of all of it.
Same data at birth,
completely separate lives after.
Meet the app:
demo-pgadmin,
a PostgreSQL with a pgAdmin
interface,
mounted and running.
One live repo.
Let's clone it.
This is the original,
in the browser.
pgAdmin asks for a login,
because it's the production copy,
and production stays guarded.
Once we're in,
let's open the query tool and look
at the data:
a tasks table with four real rows.
Fork it.
The copy-on-write clone takes seconds regardless of
size;
detach returns as soon as the containers
start,
while health checks continue in the background.
Forked and starting.
The data did not get copied — it got
shared,
until one side changes it.
And here's the fork's pgAdmin.
No login this time:
forks are disposable sandboxes,
so the gate steps aside.
Run the same query,
and there they are,
the same four tasks.
The fork inherited every row.
Two repositories now:
the original and the experiment,
each with its own containers,
network,
and disk view.
Same machine,
two isolated worlds.
Done experimenting?
Delete the fork.
Seconds to create,
seconds to throw away — the
original never knew it existed.
Gone.
The original kept serving the whole time.
So fork freely,
production can't get hurt.
Next up,
we look at secrets,
the one thing your forks deliberately don't
inherit.
See you there!